PR 4 of n: Add ML PLIER notebook (#261)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: machine-learning/03-openpbta_PLIER.Rmd

output: 
  html_notebook:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
author: CCDL for ALSF
date: 2020
---

In this notebook, we'll use a method called Pathway-Level Information Extractor
(PLIER) ([Mao et al. _Nature Methods._ 2019.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0456-1)).

We like PLIER for a few reasons:

* It is a matrix factorization approach. 
That means we can get a low-dimensional representation of our data.
Specifically, PLIER learns correlated patterns of expression in our data or 
latent variables (LVs).
* It includes penalties such that _some_ of the LVs will align with gene sets 
that we give it, so it's excellent for biological discovery.
* The authors demonstrated that it performs favorably with regard to estimating 
proportion of immune cells in a sample as compared to other methods.
* Because not _all_ LVs align with the gene sets we input, some of them capture 
unwanted technical variation. 
In our experience with the method, it does this quite well.

## Set up

```{r set_seed}
# We will need this for our dimension reduction to be reproducible and there is
# some sampling that goes into collapsing our RNA-seq matrix
seed <- 1234

> set.seed(seed)

Author: We do reuse the seed later as an argument to `PLIER::PLIER()`. (There's also another intermediate step that I had used it but it's wrapped up in `PLIER::PLIER()` so I've removed it.)

                  # The values for these two columns are separated by _
                  sep = "_",
                  # Some gene symbols themselves contain _, so when that happens
                  # merge everything after the first _ into the gene_symbol
                  # column
                  extra = "merge")

# We no longer need the data frame we read in, so we'll remove it to save some
# memory
rm(rnaseq_df)
```

Alright, what does our new data frame look like?

```{r head_symbol_df, live = TRUE}
head(symbol_rnaseq_df)
```

We won't need the column with the Ensembl identifiers anymore, so let's remove it.

```{r remove_ensg, live = TRUE}
symbol_rnaseq_df <- symbol_rnaseq_df %>%
  select(-ensembl_id)
```

### Collapsing duplicate gene symbols

```{r any_duplicated}
any(duplicated(symbol_rnaseq_df$gene_symbol))
```

How many duplicated gene symbols are there?

```{r how_many_duplicated}
sum(duplicated(symbol_rnaseq_df$gene_symbol))
```

Relative to the total number of genes, there are not too many genes that are duplicated.

```{r add_row_means}
# mean transformed value across the entire cohort
symbol_rnaseq_df$mean_value <- rowMeans(symbol_rnaseq_df[, -1])
```

> We'll use a single gene symbol that we've randomly picked to follow along with these processing steps!

Author: It's not a snoRNA, okay? And also _two_ gene symbols.

### Pathway data

> The `PLIER` package comes with different gene sets we can use as input during training.

Author: They are matrices of binary values where genes are rows and pathways or gene sets are columns. I didn't think that was worth writing down but I can.

> The `PLIER` package comes with different gene sets we can use as input during training.

Reviewer: Probably not, but maybe just say that they are in a format that PLIER wants?

```{r plier_data}
data("bloodCellMarkersIRISDMAP")
data("canonicalPathways")
data("svmMarkers")

# Combine the pathway data from PLIER
all_pathways <- PLIER::combinePaths(bloodCellMarkersIRISDMAP, 
                                    canonicalPathways,
                                    svmMarkers)
```

### Row normalize

> And a built-in function to row normalize the expression data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`PLIER` comes with a built-in function to row normalize the expression data.
```

This is z-scoring the expression values for each gene.

```{r row_normalize, live = TRUE}
# Row normalize -- z-scoring the genes
medulloblastoma_zscore <- PLIER::rowNorm(medulloblastoma_rnaseq_mat)
```

### Run PLIER

```{r common_genes}
# Identify genes that are common to the pathway data and the zscore mat
common_genes <- PLIER::commonRows(all_pathways, medulloblastoma_zscore)
```

Now for the main PLIER function.

```{r run_plier}
plier_results <- PLIER::PLIER(data = medulloblastoma_zscore[common_genes, ],
                              priorMat = all_pathways[common_genes, ],
                              rseed = seed)
```

### Explore the model

What does the output of `PLIER::PLIER()` look like?

```{r view_plier, live = TRUE}
View(plier_results)
```

The _U_ matrix tells us about how the latent variables learned by the model relate to the pathways we used as input.

```{r plot_u}
PLIER::plotU(plier_results)
```

> `summary` returns the FDR and AUC values for input pathway to latent variable relationships.

Reviewer: Have we said what AUC is yet?

```suggestion
`summary()` of a `PLIER` results object returns the FDR and AUC values for input pathway to latent variable relationships.
```
